Static analysis tool for determinism checking (#702)
temporalio/sdk-go: contrib/tools/workflowcheck/README.md

# Temporal Workflow Check

Temporal Workflow Check is a tool that statically analyzes

> [Temporal Go workflows](https://docs.temporal.io/docs/go/workflows/) (i.e. functions passed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporal [Workflow Definitions written in Go](https://docs.temporal.io/docs/go/how-to-write-a-workflow-definition-in-go) (i.e. functions passed to
```

Author: Fixed

`worker.RegisterWorkflow`) to check for non-deterministic code either directly in the function or in a function called

> by the workflow. It is highly optimized to scan large codebases quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by the Workflow. It is highly optimized to scan large codebases quickly.
```

Author: Fixed

**NOTE: This will not catch all cases of non-determinism such as global var mutation. This is just a helper and

> developers should still scrutinize workflow code for other non-determinisms.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
developers should still scrutinize Workflow code for other non-determinisms.**
```

Author: Fixed

## Installing

To install with [Go](https://golang.org/) installed and on the `PATH`, run:

    go install go.temporal.io/sdk/contrib/tools/workflowcheck

Or you can simply build by running `go build` inside of this directory. 

## CLI Usage

The executable has arguments in the form:

    workflowcheck [-flag] [package]

To simply check all source, navigate to the root of the repository/module to check and, with `workflowcheck` on
the `PATH`, run:

    workflowcheck ./...

> For each workflow passed to `RegisterWorkflow` that is considered non-deterministic, this will output the reasons why.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each Workflow Definition registered with `RegisterWorkflow` that is considered non-deterministic, this will output the reasons why.
```

Author: Fixed

> There is no output if all workflows are properly deterministic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no output if all Workflow Definitions are properly deterministic.
```

Author: Fixed

> The output is hierarchical if the reason occurs in code that the workflow calls. For example, if a workflow X calls Y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is hierarchical if the reason occurs in code that the Workflow calls. For example, if a Workflow X calls Y
```

Author: Fixed

Note, the source must be valid and compilable Go source for the tool to work. The package arguments are the same as any
other `go` tool. Run `workflowcheck -help` for more details on arguments. See "Configuration" below on how to configure
the checker.

### Example

Given the following file called `workflow.go` at the root of the `example.com/myworkflow` module:

```go
package myworkflow

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"

	"go.temporal.io/sdk/worker"
	"go.temporal.io/sdk/workflow"
)

func Register(w worker.WorkflowRegistry) {
	w.RegisterWorkflow(MyWorkflow)
}

func MyWorkflow(workflow.Context) error {
	now := time.Now()
	fmt.Printf("Now: %v\n", now)
	return nil
}
```

If `workflowcheck .` is run, the following output will appear:

```
/path/to/workflow.go:12:2: example.com/myworkflow.MyWorkflow is non-deterministic, reason: calls non-deterministic function time.Now
  time.Now is non-deterministic, reason: declared non-deterministic
/path/to/workflow.go:12:2: example.com/myworkflow.MyWorkflow is non-deterministic, reason: calls non-deterministic function fmt.Printf
  fmt.Printf is non-deterministic, reason: accesses non-deterministic var os.Stdout
```

> The `-show-pos` argument can be provided to see exactly where each offending call happens. If we wanted to allow
> `fmt.Printf` to be used in all workflows, we could have the config `workflowcheck.config.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `-show-pos` argument can be provided to see exactly where each offending call happens. If we wanted to allow
`fmt.Printf` to be used in all Workflows, we could have the config `workflowcheck.config.yaml`:
```

Author: Fixed

  `sync.Map` (that does map iteration) as a cache of method layouts
* `runtime.Caller` - Was considered non-deterministic because deep down in Go internal source, some `runtime` source
  starts a goroutine on lazy GC start when building CGo frames
* `go.temporal.io/sdk/internal.propagateCancel` - Was considered non-deterministic because it starts a goroutine
* `(*go.temporal.io/sdk/internal.cancelCtx).cancel` - Was considered non-deterministic because it iterates over a
  map

## Configuration

A YAML configuration file can be provided via the `-config` flag. Here is an example config with details on what can be
set:

```yaml
# Overrides whether a function or variable is considered deterministic. The key
# is one of:
#
#   /path/to/package.Function
#   /path/to/package.Var
#   (/path/to/package.Receiver).Function
#   (*/path/to/package.Receiver).Function
#
# The value is true to be considered non-deterministic or false to be considered
# deterministic.
decls:
  github.com/google/uuid.rander: true

# Set of regexes for files to skip (matched after filepath.ToSlash applied)
skip:
  - 'some/package/[^/]*\.go'
```

> For example, say this function was called from a workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, say this function was called from a Workflow:
```

Author: Fixed

# Temporal Workflow Check

Temporal Workflow Check is a tool that statically analyzes
[Temporal Go workflows](https://docs.temporal.io/docs/go/workflows/) (i.e. functions passed to
`worker.RegisterWorkflow`) to check for non-deterministic code either directly in the function or in a function called
by the workflow. It is highly optimized to scan large codebases quickly.

**NOTE: This will not catch all cases of non-determinism such as global var mutation. This is just a helper and
developers should still scrutinize workflow code for other non-determinisms.**

## Installing

> Build like a normal Go app. With this repository cloned and [Go](https://golang.org/) installed and on the `PATH`, run:

Author: Remove this line

Author: Fixed

the checker.

### Example

Given the following file called `workflow.go` at the root of the `example.com/myworkflow` module:

```go
package myworkflow

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"

	"go.temporal.io/sdk/worker"
	"go.temporal.io/sdk/workflow"
)

func Register(w worker.WorkflowRegistry) {
	w.RegisterWorkflow(MyWorkflow)
}

func MyWorkflow(workflow.Context) error {
	now := time.Now()
	fmt.Printf("Now: %v\n", now)
	return nil
}
```

If `workflowcheck .` is run, the following output will appear:

```
/path/to/workflow.go:12:2: example.com/myworkflow.MyWorkflow is non-deterministic, reason: calls non-deterministic function time.Now
  time.Now is non-deterministic, reason: declared non-deterministic
/path/to/workflow.go:12:2: example.com/myworkflow.MyWorkflow is non-deterministic, reason: calls non-deterministic function fmt.Printf
  fmt.Printf is non-deterministic, reason: accesses non-deterministic var os.Stdout
```

The `-show-pos` argument can be provided to see exactly where each offending call happens. If we wanted to allow
`fmt.Printf` to be used in all workflows, we could have the config `workflowcheck.config.yaml`:

```yaml
decls:
  fmt.Printf: false
```

> Then running `workflowcheck -config workflowcheck.config.yaml .` Would not only show the `time.Now` error. See the

Reviewer 2: I'd have the tool look for config in a default location

Author: Good question/thought!

I considered that, but not only is configuration not required, you are not going to run this tool centrally, it is very dependent on context. I had considered something like a `.workflowcheck.config.yaml` but often for analysis tools that is not for where the program is executed but rather where the program is scanning. But there is more complexity and little value in merging many configs in different packages based on where this is scanning (we have inline ignoring for most of those use cases).

Since I could not figure out whether the implicit config was based on scan location or run location, I decided it was harmless to ask for a config explicitly if needed. Most people probably won't need a config (our entire `samples-go` repo will not for example).

> Then running `workflowcheck -config workflowcheck.config.yaml .` Would not only show the `time.Now` error. See the

Author: ```suggestion
Then running `workflowcheck -config workflowcheck.config.yaml .` would only show the `time.Now` error. See the
```

Author: Fixed

"Configuration" section below for more details on configuration.

If, say, we wanted that specific `time.Now` call to be allowed, we could add the `//workflowcheck:ignore` comment right
above or on the right-hand side of the line that calls it. Then the next `workflowcheck` call would no longer report it

> as non-deterministic.

Author: ```suggestion
as non-deterministic. See "Inline Ignoring" below.
```

Author: Fixed

## `go vet` and VisualStudio Code Usage

This tool works well with `go vet`. If the same example for CLI above was instead run with:

    go vet -vettool /path/to/workflowcheck

The same output would appear. The benefit of using `go vet` is that output is cached and many IDEs already support it.

To add to Visual Studio Code, add the following to your settings:

```jsonc
  // If using Windows, be sure to escape backslashes

>   "go.vetFlags": ["-vettool", "c:\\work\\tem\\static-analysis\\temporal-sdk-go\\contrib\\tools\\workflowcheck\\workflowcheck.exe"],

Author: I leaked my personal approach here, heh.

```suggestion
  "go.vetFlags": ["-vettool", "/path/to/workflowcheck"],
```
